---
slug: "16"
title: "16"
date: December 1, 2020 6:49 AM
thumbnail: ""
author: Sam
tag: 30 before 30
---
This morning I can't help reflecting on *Those Winter Sundays*. I haven't thought about it really ever since I chose to memorize it for school decades ago (I've been around that long?), but here I am, on a Tuesday, thinking about the unrecognized selflessness of Robert Hayden's dad driving out the cold for his family. It's not particularly cold outside but I feel like I have been. I have maintained a distance between my in-laws that seems, at this point, unwarranted. They weren't raised in America; their culture was foreign to me yet in so many ways familiar. We managed to laugh with each other, and relate, to share food and stories, and make memories that I will always carry with me.

Pushing through social miscues is not something that I excel at, and the language/cultural/spiritual barriers in this house often felt insurmountable. But they were always temporary. I knew this and spoke truth to it during my entire stay, yet still I feel blindsighted and confused as to why my oldest daughter is going to have to deal with bitter change that's, ultimately, for the better. There will be no more daily walks with Didi, were they explore every nook and cranny of an apartment complex that we've been dying to leave. No more unsolicited, admittedy relevant, suggestions on outerwear from Babula, or grapes scraped of every ugly bit and served dangerously close to naptime. My emotions typically ran from jealous to outright rage to relief, but now what? 

I know Phoenix will need more from me, both of my babes will. I'll need to find a way to absorb the resolute, often jovial, nature of Andrey and channel Nina's eloquence (she can honestly talk forever). It would not be obvious to anyone but I am so grateful for the totality of their perspective, raw and cutting and present. This time in this place has taught me so much that I would have never learned on my own. But it's time to be on my own with the family I started and put my experience to work carving out a safe space for them to grow as I have.