---
slug: "8"
title: "8"
date: November 24, 2020 9:02 AM
thumbnail: ""
author: Sam
tag: 30 before 30
---
### Long in the tooth :(

So I've been sleeping on my oral health pretty hard. Thinking that eating organic for the past 15 years alone would yield desirable outcomes is probably my biggest self-derived fallacy. **Diet** is a prevailing theme yet there are so many equally relevant factors. **Water quality**: I've been pretty solid on this but to reiterate the main point: fluoride, when ingested, is absolutely a neurotoxin and has minimally observed benefits. **Stress**, and cortisol, have had huge effects on my mental health, but that's obvious. What happens in the mouth happens in the body, less obvious. The **microbiome**, and oral microbiome, are huge, literally; our microbiome extends 5 feet around us at all times. It is kickstarted at birth from our mother (our mitocrondia are from mama too), and this field seems like a goddamn mystery to conventional practitioners (but not ***nutritional periodontists***). I have recognized the signs of my dysbiosis but there is hope. Let's list up the strategy:

* No mouth-breathing -> yeah, yeah, I know
* Boka toothpaste if I need that nostalgia hit -> **hydroxyapatite**
* Brush with coconut oil/baking soda if I'm trying to be effective -> don't need a bunch of corosive ingredients wrecking my gums and hitting my bloodstream
* Brush 45 minutes after eating (and first thing in the morning) -> keep that post meal-slurry intact until it settles, then remove the excess
* Get that **K2** on the reg (duck/liver pate slaps)
* Prebiotic arguably more important than probiotic for teeth -> both are vital
* Intermittent fasting and minimal snacking -> give the teeth time to remineralize (eating demineralizes)
* Scrape that tongue daily -> it's like a shag rug apartment complex for parasites and bacteria
* Oil pulling -> 5 minutes